---
title: 'ToRPEDO'
date: 2024-08-03
permalink: /posts/torpedo/
tags:
  - computer security
  - cellular privacy
---

This is a short review of the paper _Privacy Attacks to the 4G and 5G Cellular Paging Protocols Using Side Channel Information_ by Hussain et al. 

Motivation & Threat Model
=========
Cellular devices flip between idling and polling pending services to conserve power. Devices must sync with the core network to determine this frequency which fixed per SIM card which leads to vulnerabilities. Victim’s locations, phone number, social media handle, parts of their IMSI can be discovered apart from fabricating paging messages and perform denial of service attacks using commodity hardware. Adversary has a victim in mind (phone number, twitter handle, etc.) to send service requests to (can be stealthy). He monitors all paging slots in a particular area(s) and can host a fake base station.

Methodology
=======
The attacker first figures out the paging occasion. Each device has a fixed paging frequency slot determined by its IMSI. The attacker can send requests to any victim identifies the one with abnormally high frequency (if any) correlating with their requests. Once paging occasion is identified, IMSI can be forced to be revealed/cracked which allows all sorts of fabrications and denial of service attacks.

Key Results
=======
Victim’s location, message fabrication, DOS attacks and attacks that use IMSI just require the mobile number of the victim. Weak links like some service providers that use IMSI instead of TMSI in paging records, infrequent TMSI change when used to get paging occasion, etc. Countermeasures to figuring out paging occasion using fake paging messages at moderate overhead. Paper incrementally describes various attacks, intuition, provides threat models, and the math behind them. Countermeasures and its evaluation are given for ToRPEDO.

Final Thoughts
=====
This paper shows vulnerabilities in cellular networks that can leak private information like location, IMSI information which can lead to cloning SIM card and impersonation. Worse, widespread chaos can ensue through fake emergency messages via page channel hijacking. If the adversary is highly certain of some locations the victim ought to be in, then with a relatively low cost he can carry out the attack using available hardware without the victim noticing. This also makes previous attacks conditional on IMSI easier by requiring just the victim’s number along other new attacks that could be developed.