---
title: 'Muscles'
date: 2024-04-28
permalink: /posts/muscles/
tags:
  - muscles
  - hypertrophy
  - strength
---

Which came first? The chicken or the egg? Well, it's the egg obviously. [I like this song.](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=aiGL0MaVcU4&list=RDAMVMaiGL0MaVcU4)

The parents of the first chicken were clearly _not_ chickens, and chickens definitely came from eggs. My favorite thing to do, apart from eating, is to train my muscles. This is a post about the things I learned related to muscle training, strength gain, nutrition and so on. 

Why muscles?
======
The process, to me, is therapeutic. I find that the results you get from this, is to a large extent, proportional to the amount of effort you put it. Humans really don't need a lot of muscle, but some is definitely beneficial. As we get older, the general belief is that we get weaker. But this is due to the fact that we don't focus on building strength and muscles, which actually helps us age gracefully. Below are three main factors that we _can_ mostly control to help us in this journey. Are there factors that we can't control? Yes. Genetics. The amount of muscle your body is able to put on, your sensitivity to creatine (although not a big factor), metabolism(?), your muscle insertions (if you're into those sorts of things), allergic reactions. Or you might be vegan and find it hard to consume enough protein without planning. But that doesn't mean we can't try. Make the most out of what we got. 

Training Hard
======
Your body actively resists to put on any more muscle than necessary, it just wants to ensure you are able to reproduce and keep the human race alive :) (with the population today, as if that's a challenge). So you must train pretty hard to force it to. And not only train, but get other factors like sleep and food right too. What does it mean to train hard? Lift heavy? More reps? More sets? Do you need to audibly grunt? It's often not so simple. It could be a combination of all or none. Many usually overestimate how hard they've trained. For good results, as new research showns, you need to go pretty close to physical failure. 

Sleeping Tight
======
Nothing much to say about this, but, this is the time where your body actually builds and repairs stuff. So, very important indeed. Six to eight hours of sleep is pretty good and should be aimed for.

Eating Right
======
Ahh. The forbidden one. Okay, there are no such things as inherently 'bad' foods (except if it contains poison, mold/fungus, or any other chemicals that could kill you). "What??? Even sugar?". Yup, it isn't evil (unless you eat a kilo of it, and/or you are diabetic). If you eat 'clean' most of the time, then you can have your snacks and treats the remaining 10-15% of the time. It should be fine. 

The simple rules are:
- There is no one diet plan (keto, carnivore, vegan, etc) that works for everyone. You certainly can choose what suits you
- *Net gain = Calories in - Calories out*  always holds no matter what (not talking about health here, but a from a gain or loss perspective)
- If you are obese and want to shed some fat, you have to eat lesser amount of calories than you require. 
  - And it is better to eat more of protein rich foods over other macros because you absolutely don't want to lose muscle
  - If fats keep you satiated longer, prefer it over carbs and vice versa.
  - Exercise comes a long way to preserve muscles and build them. Lift weights and do some form of cardio (do weights before cardio)
- If you need to gain some mass, you guessed it, eat more.
  - Again, more protein, because you want to build on as much muscle to be healthy.
  - Fats are calorie dense food, so it's an ideal macro to aim for if you struggle with eating a lot
  - Exercise helps in this case too
- Overall, more protein, exercise, and eating an amount of food depending on requirement. See? Simple.

_And what exactly are clean foods?_ 
----
Hard to describe, but minimal ingredients? Again, depending on the type of food, some may require stabilizers, or preservatives but you can always look up such information online and decide for yourself. Also just because something is processed, it doesn't mean that it's bad. Whey is processed by separating milk, but it isn't bad. On the other hand so is SPAM, which is bad. This, then, boils down to how you define processed. So, labelling foods this way has no meaning and shouldn't be done. The more addictive a particular type of food is, the more likely that it isn't good for you. But if you can control how much of it you eat, then you are totally fine.

_What about supplements?_
----
Well, what about them? Some are absolutely great if you need them. Most don't work. If you're lacking protein, if you need creatine, or multivitamins they come in handy. Do you *need* them? Nope. Pre-workouts are caffeine bombs, or they contain other stuff that I have no idea about and probably need to read up on. Black coffee is good enough for me. I'll cross that bridge when I get there.

_Organic, cage-free, Non-GMO, etc.?_ 
----
Healthwise, absolutely they don't matter as long as the non-those-things claim what they have in them and nothing more. Ethics? Probably, the way it's farmed and animals are raised and so on. They cost a tonne more, and in many cases, they aren't even that ethical as you think. Pick your poison. 

_I follow all of this but I still don't have visible abs :(_
----
 Aha. Being healthy is different from having sub 15% body fat. A healthy range is between 14-20% for males and a bit higher for females (again numbers vary from individuals). People often correlate having big muscles, and *extremely* low body fat percentages as being healthy. There is a threshold for both of those which you should generally aim for. However, if you want to have visible abs, then you need to really struggle because your body doesn't want what your mind wants. So, it is super hard to bend it to your will (literally). And the closer you are to your goal, they harder it will become, because your body will resist even more. But if that is what you want, then, absolutely go for it (I am). 
