---
title: 'The egg'
date: 2024-04-28
permalink: /posts/egg/
tags:
  - computer science
  - security
  - operating systems
  - networks
---

Trying to summarizing the things I learned in computer science in these posts for topics like security, operating systems, networks, hardware; for my own reference and anyone else who comes across it :). [Also, cool song](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=N6ZGcZ-2360&si=WCAGfYq5dKEqQd8g)

Computers are everywhere. No matter which field you specialize in, you would probably end up using a computer to perform some parts of a task. You would probably know how to use a computer to some extent, and even know to write some code - or you would be able to reproduce it from the internet at least. A question: Why should someone hire a computer science student over someone who is able to write code (not that computer science students can't code)? 

Use or Understand?
=======
Do we actually need to understand how something works? Or is it enough to just learn how to use it and get by? It depends really. If your profession depends on understanding it, then, it is pretty clear. If you just need computers to play solitaire or something then you really don't have to bother.But, learning something new is fun :). And analogies certainly help. 

With all the innovations and technological advancements, it can be quite hard to grasp a particular concept. But there's always a simple first design or idea that later evolved into what it is today. For example, what the _heck_ is the OSI model? Why are there layers? Why do we need both IP and MAC addresses, isn't one enough? Why do we need virutal memory? And then there are these questions that one may have - if I play a song on a single core processor, will I be able to run any other process? What do operating systems actually do? How did they compile the first compiler? And many others that I can't think of right now :p.

TL;DR
======
tl;dr of a traditional computer: 
An electronic box on which you can store digital media/applications and play/run them. These files require resources to run like CPU (to perform calculations and run instructions), memory (to store data and instruction), maybe a network card (to send data over the network), a GPU (to do math at high speeds; used in games,video editing, etc). Some hardware can help alleviate load off of the CPU by doing calculations instead of sending everything to the CPU (GPU/crypto processors/Network Interface Cards). The operating system provides an easy way to manage and access your stored files/applications. It would be quite difficult to do anything without it. 

The processors understand a set of instructions (Instruction Set Architecture, ISA), like copy this value from here to there, or add these two numbers. This is encoded using binary (1s and 0s). The code of applications being run on the processor must be in the form that the processor understands. That is, if the code line in the app wants to add two numbers, then the instruction must be the binary encoded version of add according to the processor. Imagine having to write only in binary. Luckily, we can use a higher level representation called assembly language that maps words to instructions which is a bit easier to write in (which an _assembler_ converts to binary for the processor). There are several types (architectures) of processors (ARM, x86, PowerPC) each having its own ISA. Since, it is quite tedious to write code even in assembly, we write code in a slightly more human readable format (in languages like python, C/C++, etc) and have other applications convert them for us (compilers, interpreters) into a specific architecture or an intermediate form which is again converted to a specific architecture when running.

Primary memory, or RAM, is where an application in execution stores its data. It has its own private space, and the OS makes sure no one tries to read from there or write into that region. Secondary memory (hard disks) is where the actual files are stored. They are much slower to access. In general, slower memory is large in size, less expensive and further away from the processor; and faster memory is smaller in size, more expensive and closer to the processor (cache, registers). This is because they use different electornic componets to produce these. We make use of this idea roughly: if something was used recently, it might be used again in the future, and we can store it in the limited, but extremly fast memory so our next retrieval will be super fast. And if our guess is wrong... well... can't help it. We can't optimize everything, but we can try to optimize the common case.

There can be several other hardware components that could be connected to it like audio output devices, display devices, input devices like mice and keyboards (generally called peripherals). They make your experience with a computer more interactive and allow you to be productive. When connected to the internet, you can share information with other computers and communicate anywhere.
