---
title: 'Return Oriented Programming'
date: 2024-08-01
permalink: /posts/rop/
tags:
  - computer security
---

This is a short review of the paper _Return-Oriented Programming: Systems, Languages, and Applications_ by Shacham et al.

Motivation & Threat Model
=========
This introduces Return-Oriented Programming exploit that bypasses defenses (executable space protection, trusted computing, etc,) as it doesn’t inject code. It builds a Turing Complete set of ‘gadgets’, an arrangement of words on the stack/heap, that reuses code to carry an attack. Adversary can write into stack/heap (say, by buffer overflow) of a program that lacks control flow integrity is vulnerable.

Methodology
=======
ROP aims to replace the instruction pointer with the stack pointer, with words on the stack acting as instructions. Code chunks are ‘borrowed’ from library functions which generally contain system calls. A ‘ret’ instruction at the end of every instruction sequence will help fetch and decode. The gadgets are arranged so that the stack pointer points to the first word in the gadget and a ret instruction is executed. The stack pointer then points to the next instruction to be executed and so on.

Key Results
=======
It’s not enough to prevent entry of malicious code into a system to keep it safe. Automated gadget generation helps attackers synthesize a control flow. This paper details how a ROP can be made to work on SPARC and x86 architectures. It discusses attacks like buffer overflow and how this was made difficult to exploit and why W(xor)X protection was still prevalent even though return-to-libc came about. x86 and SPARC architecture have been talked in detail. Ways to build the required gadgets (branching, loading, logic, etc.) have been elucidated.

Final Thoughts
=====
This exploit cannot be detected by any anti-malware or trusted computing technology as there is no ‘bad’ code. It is all application code. It is possible for an adversary to chain a set of gadgets which need not be contiguous on a stack/heap and carry out their attack. Questions like availability of binaries to generate gadgets, ASLR status, whether an overflow vulnerability exists in the code and so on, come into play when an adversary wants to carry out this attack, and hence it might not be simple. But a chink in the armour is all it takes to exploit software and cause massive damage.