---
title: 'Computer Science Stuff'
date: 2024-04-28
permalink: /posts/2024/CS/
tags:
  - computer science
  - security
  - operating systems
  - networks
---

For the things I learned in computer science. Security, operating systems, linux thingies, networks, hardware, it's all in here. Since they are all related in some way, it is hard to seperate them out, but I'll try my best.

Operating Systems
======
They dictate how software and applications can interact with the hardware. Some are minimilistic, some are complex. They are present to make sure the users and the developers don't worry about intricacies involved in how to make use of the hardware. They ensure you get accesses to resources you requested, if you have the right permissions. There are many programs to be run, but resources are limited. The OS gives an illusion that each program owns the resource it uses. There are some 'microkernels' that allow you to use hardware to suit your needs rather than following a fixed mechanism. You may choose the mechanism for a particular policy, for example, for scheduling threads in your program you can use FCFS. While I can use round robin for my program and so on. This also greatly improves security as they isolate components to a great degree, thereby minimizing faults to a single domain. However, for efficiency reasons, most OSes today don't allow you to operate this way. They have a predetermined mechanism for every policy.

Virtual Memory
------
Many things in computer systems are solved by using a level of indirection. Virtual memory is one such thing. Rather than loading your application directly into the physical memory (RAM), a table (page table) of mapping between virtual memory addresses and physical addresses is created. OS needs to give the illusion that the entire RAM is available to the process, although it is shared by multiple processes and any of them can be run according to priorities. This table also stores whether the page is valid or not, because there might be another application that was context swtiched which could replace that physical memory location, thus invalidating it for the old process.

Synchronisation
------

Drivers
------

Networks
=====
For simplicity reasons, the network is organized into layers. So we can develop a particular part/protocol in a specific layer without worrying about how other layers work. The 5 major layers are: Application, Transport, Network, Data, Physical. The data in transmission is called by different names in each layer - segment, fragment, datagram. But I will just refer to it as a packet. The idea is that each top layer is encapsulated by the layer below. Each layer has its own metadata called headers that describe what is being carried in the actual data. Usually it contains length of the data(+metadata), type of protocol, among other interesting flags and values. The various devices enroute to the packet's destination strip down the layers to look inside and decide what to do with the packet. Which layer is stripped down depends on the type of the device, specifically, which layer it belongs to and its functionality. 
However, it is not the only way you can design networks. For example, there is the content based networking which works by a requester asking for a specific content and the content, when found would be returned back to the requester. The routing would then work by looking for the prefix matches. Unlike IP addresses, which is distributed based on geographical location, the content requested decides where to fetch data from. The internet is valuable for _what_ it contains, but the communication is in terms of _where_ to go to. This would eliminate awkward things like CDNs which replicate the content for faster and easier distribution. There would be no need to map content and location (indicated by IPs).

Application Layer
-----
The layer where all the applications we use reside. Examples are HTTP, FTP, Telnet, etc. Any application that you would use on a computer would probably lie over here. 

Transport Layer
----
It provides the logical connection between applications on different 'hosts'. The operating system usually implements this layer and the application layer relies on this to pass on the message to the network. They are like little gateways. Two of the most common protocols here are Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). TCP is connection oriented and gives you guarantees like reliable transport, ensures no packet is lost and delivered in the correct order and things like congestion control.  

Security
===