---
title: 'SSH'
date: 2024-08-02
permalink: /posts/ssh/
tags:
  - computer security
---

This is a short review of the paper _SSH - Secure Login Connections over the Internet_ by Tatu Ylonen 

Motivation & Threat Model
=========
The internet inherently does not provide any protection while transmitting data. This would obviously cause an issue as no data transfer would be safe. Tatu suggests that encryption, a strong one, is the way to maintain security as a well-funded organisations can break weak encryptions. SSH is introduced to combat these issues and allow for safe remote logins, file transfer, communication and so on. The author discusses many ways an adversary may attack (keeping in mind that the data transferred is in cleartext) – Network Monitoring (attacker can eavesdrop), DNS/Routing Spoofing (attacker can route the client’s packets in his own way), Connection Hijacking (attacker can hijack the connection undetected), Denial of Service (attacker can slow down or kill the service by bombarding it with requests).

Methodology
=======
The client requests a connection with a server. The server sends 2 keys, RSA key and the RSA host key for the client to verify in its own database. The RSA key changes every hour in case the host key is compromised. A 256-bit random session key is generated by the client and encrypted using the two server keys. This is sent to the server and the server decrypts it, then the client is authenticated through either password, SecureID, or RSA authentication. The actual session starts, each side sends packets asynchronously. SSH divides the data into packets and adds some information to it like the packet length, padding, MAC. Then this packet is encrypted using IDEA-CFB or 3DES-CBC. Integrity is checked using Cyclic Redundancy Check 32 bit and in case of an error the connection terminates, the user is notified, and the error is logged. All random numbers are generated from a cryptographically strong generator with a pool of 8192 bits of randomness.

Key Results
=======
SSH helps securely login, forward connections, send data, among other things to other computers over the unsecure internet in a fast and convenient way. Its widespread use meant that the cheapest and fastest way to communicate became secure with a low chance of prying eyes. Paper shows how SSH addresses most of the threat model through strong cryptography techniques and it’s discussed in detail. It emphasises that SSH is convenient for the user and not too complex, the performance is good as this does not overburden the processor, and the limitation is from network bandwidths. Each step of the SSH setup is discussed bringing forth the transparency of the protocol. The paper also discusses about the new SSH protocol and its benefits. A vulnerability during initial connection, key exchange is pointed out and a possible solution of public key infrastructure is given.

Final Thoughts
=====
SSH is presented as a neat way to securely access other machines or any data transfer. It’s simple to use, free for non-commercial use, and mostly eliminates anyone from looking at the actual data. Questions like implementation of security in the lower layers of the network versus the application layer (trade-offs between computational power and security) arise.  In conclusion, the paper explains how SSH solves a major issue that exists, and its importance is clear as SSH has been built upon and is being used even in today’s much larger and unsecure network.