---
title: 'Computer Networks'
date: 2024-05-03
permalink: /posts/networks/
tags:
  - computer science
  - computer networks
---

The key to rapid development is the ability to share data and communicate over vast distances at blazing speeds (I hit 10 Mbps on a good day ;_;). 

One of the greatest and complex pieces of technology we've built is the internet. It connects hosts (computers/servers, phones) to other hosts through the core (routers and switches). It was developed pretty early on, and now that it has grown so much, we really can't change the architecture it follows. We would probably have to prototype new architectures in organisations with data centers (like SDNs being adopted in cloud centers). But the scale is much smaller than the internet, maybe we can test it on another planet.

Networks
=====
For simplicity reasons, the network is organized into layers. So we can develop a particular part/protocol in a specific layer without worrying about how other layers work. The 5 major layers are: Application, Transport, Network, Data, Physical. The data in transmission is called by different names in each layer - segment, fragment, datagram. But I will just refer to it as a packet. The idea is that each top layer is encapsulated by the layer below. Each layer has its own metadata called headers that describe what is being carried in the actual data. Usually it contains length of the data(+metadata), type of protocol, among other interesting flags and values. The various devices enroute to the packet's destination strip down the layers to look inside and decide what to do with the packet. Which layer is stripped down depends on the type of the device, specifically, which layer it belongs to and its functionality. 
However, it is not the only way you can design networks. For example, there is the content based networking which works by a requester asking for a specific content and the content, when found would be returned back to the requester. The routing would then work by looking for the prefix matches. Unlike IP addresses, which is distributed based on geographical location, the content requested decides where to fetch data from. The internet is valuable for _what_ it contains, but the communication is in terms of _where_ to go to. This would eliminate awkward things like CDNs which replicate the content for faster and easier distribution. There would be no need to map content and location (indicated by IPs).

Application Layer
-----
The layer where all the applications we use reside. Examples are HTTP, FTP, Telnet, etc. Any application that you would use on a computer would probably lie over here. 

Transport Layer
----
It provides the logical connection between applications on different 'hosts'. The operating system usually implements this layer and the application layer relies on this to pass on the message to the network. They are like little gateways. Two of the most common protocols here are Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). TCP is connection oriented and gives you guarantees like reliable transport, ensures no packet is lost and delivered in the correct order and things like congestion control.

(TBD lol)